 Hare Krishna, everyone!

A very warm welcome back again to our ongoing series on the glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma. nama om viṣṇupādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale śrīmate bhaktivedānta-svāmin iti nāmine namaste sarasvate deve gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe nirviśeṣa-śūnyavādi-paścātya-deśa-tāriṇe All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda, the revealer of the Dawn.

So, in our past two lectures, we covered some of the divine couple’s noontime and afternoon pastimes, namely at Rādhākuṇḍa and Suryakunda. So today, I’d like to discuss some of their late morning pastimes. I say “some” because, as we know, the pastimes of the Lord are unlimited.

We all sang during the recent month of Kārtika a beautiful prayer from the Daśa-mūrti-aṣṭaka: "O Lord, I offer respectful obeisances unto Your belly, the abode of the entire universe, which is bound by Mother Yaśodā with a brilliantly effulgent rope.

To this rope, I offer my humble obeisances. I offer repeated obeisances to Your dearest most beloved Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and I bow before You who are performing unlimited, unlimited, super-excellent pastimes." All right, Kṛṣṇa. So, we can begin today with, um, cooking pastimes, morning cooking pastimes, some of which are found in Rāyaśekhara’s Aṣṭakāla-līlā-padāvalī and also in Govinda-līlāmṛta.

Therein, we hear of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s pastimes of cooking, especially when she is in Mother Yaśodā’s kitchen. At Underground, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura actually wrote a song for Arati that lists the names of some of these preparations that Rādhārāṇī cooks for Kṛṣṇa for the Yaśodā’s kitchen.

So, in the morning, such cooking starts with Rādhārāṇī receiving Yaśodā’s and Rohiṇī’s blessings to enter the kitchen and cook for Kṛṣṇa. First of all, Rādhārāṇī’s maidservants wash and dry her lotus feet. Then she follows Rohiṇī, Balarāma’s mother, into the kitchen, followed by her friends, all in single file.

It’s described, Rādhārāṇī’s friends follow her like ducklings, uh, follow their mother. So, in the kitchen, Rohiṇī gives each gopī a place to cook, a menu, and the necessary ingredients for cooking. However, knowing Śrī Rādhā’s cooking skills, she just encourages Śrī Rādhā to cook whatever her heart desires.

And surrounded by eager maidservants who know exactly what ingredients and utensils are needed for each preparation, Śrī Rādhā sits on a wooden stool and begins cooking Kṛṣṇa’s breakfast. Actually, now it’s mentioned in these scriptures that one of the opulences of Mother Yaśodā’s kitchen is that sandalwood is used for firewood in the cooking.

I thought that was really nice. Sandalwood is used for, for cooking, for the firewood, giving a very, you can imagine, sweet aroma to the entire kitchen. And it’s said that Śrī Rādhā is very grave while cooking for Kṛṣṇa, fully concentrating on each and every preparation.

Now, there’s a nice analogy given by ācāryas here that is that her focus has been compared to a brāhmaṇa meticulously pronouncing each and every syllable of mantras he chants during a yajña. You know, she’s focusing on the prep, making the preparations for Kṛṣṇa, so much attention, just like a brāhmaṇa meticulously pronounces each and every syllable of mantras he chants during a yajña.

And the following is quite a long list of some of the preparations that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī cooks for Kṛṣṇa in the morning. There’s manohara laddu, which is made with camphor and nutmeg. There’s a preparation called kadamba, a round, hard sweet shaped like a kadamba flower.

There’s padmachinī, it’s a sweet made from lotus flowers. Actually, there’s amṛta-kālī, it’s a favorite milk sweet of Kṛṣṇa. There’s gaja and kājā, gaja and kājā sweets made from flour, the latter of which, it’s described, Kṛṣṇa will literally run for.

He’ll literally run for it. Then there’s pera. It’s, it’s milk, uh, cooked down with sugar. There’s canda-curā. This is an interesting one, canda-curā. It’s a sweet, the taste of which can only be compared to powdered moonlight. Powdered moonlight. Then there’s miśrī, which is a rock candy.

Sara-bhaja, sara-bhaja is a sweet made from cream. Then there’s sara-purī, it’s a purī made by frying cream. Then she makes bindhi laddu, sweet balls made of chickpea flour, and rasa-carā. It’s the last of the sweets. It’s made from coconut.

And Rādhārāṇī also prepares various beverages like a fruit juice called mālcha and a cream drink called matani. Matani. She also makes, or rather, she prepares different types of pickles, you know, like to add flavor and spice to the preparations, āchāra.

And she places each of them in a separate container for Kṛṣṇa to take from. And Rādhārāṇī also slices fresh fruits, especially selected by Mother Yaśodā. She selects these fruits, and it’s described that in the last phase of her cooking, Rādhārāṇī prepares exquisitely fragrant rice and then cuts, cooks, and spices countless vegetables whose aroma could easily break the meditations of great sages.

What’s that?

What’s described?

Whose aroma could easily break the meditation of great sages. Now, when Rādhārāṇī is finished making all these preparations with her, her helpers, they’re all placed on, on golden plates and covered with thin cloths. And they’re all carried, these golden plates are carried to tables where, interestingly, Mother Yaśodā inspects them before serving them to Kṛṣṇa, just as a, it’s described, just as a general reviews his troops before a battle.

Mother Yaśodā inspects them, actually, before giving them to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī to serve to Kṛṣṇa, just as the general reviews his troops. Of course, Mother Yaśodā is well aware that anything Śrī Rādhā cooks becomes nectar and doesn’t have to be checked, but it’s described out of her natural maternal instinct, she feels obliged to do so.

But the ācāryas right, the real test of Rādhā’s cooking comes when Kṛṣṇa’s friends, especially Madhumaṅgala, sample one nectarian dish after another and express their approval by making all kinds of funny sounds. All kinds of funny sounds. Now, the ācāryas say that Rādhārāṇī’s cooking not only tastes like nectar but is also pleasing to the eyes, which creates a sort of problem.

And what’s the problem?

The problem is, how can one eat something so beautiful?

It’s very pleasing to the eyes, so how can someone eat something so beautiful?

But then again, how can one resist something so inviting as those nectarian preparations?

That’s the problem. It’s also said that because Rādhārāṇī cooks and then serves the meal, each dish is so filled with her love that it overwhelms Kṛṣṇa’s mind and senses. And as such, he often loses his appetite and just sits picking at the food.

So, seeing this, Mother Yaśodā becomes very upset and she scolds Kṛṣṇa. She says, "Son, I have asked Śrī Rādhā, the best cook in all of Vraja, to come at a great distance just to cook for you. And now you’re just playing with your food?

If you don’t eat properly, then Rādhā will not come back again. And why should she?" So, hearing this, Kṛṣṇa gets nervous and he looks, you know, back and forth from Rādhā to his mother, and from his mother, mother to Rādhā, back and forth.

And the ācāryas say then, to please the two of them, Kṛṣṇa eats everything on his plate, quote, "by invoking the same potency which helps him eat unlimited food offerings in an infinity of deity forms." Wow. He can eat all that food prepared by Rādhārāṇī.

How?

By invoking the same potency which helps him eat unlimited food offerings in an infinity of deity forms. So beautifully put. So, after breakfast, Kṛṣṇa and his friends, well, you can imagine they take a nap. And perspiring from the heat and tired from all the cooking, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī comes out of the kitchen and sits in a nearby room in the palace, where her maidservants wash her feet and hands with cool, fragrant water, while Lalitā Devī wipes her face and arms with a cold, damp cloth.

All the while chastising Rādhārāṇī for having overexerted herself by cooking for this cowherd boy, you know, that’s Lalitā’s mood, she’s very protective of Rādhārāṇī. So, just at that moment, Mother Yaśodā appears and she says, "Śrī Rādhā, now that you have fed everyone, you must also eat." So, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and her friends, while laughing and joking, eat preparations brought by Rohiṇī, preparations that Kuṇḍalatā had previously mixed with Kṛṣṇa’s remnants.

Preparations are brought in by Rohiṇī, but their preparations that Kuṇḍalatā had previously mixed with Kṛṣṇa’s remnants. So, when Rādhārāṇī finishes, she cleanses her mouth and accepts betel nuts to chew. So, soon afterwards, Mother Yaśodā asks Śrī Rādhā to sit on a special seat, and with great affection, she begins to dress and ornament her.

First, by re-tying Rādhā’s hair into a graceful braid. Then she applies fresh vermilion in the part of Rādhā’s hair. She puts tilaka on her forehead, kohl in her eyelids. Then she replaces Rādhārāṇī’s nose ring with their own most precious gold pearl.

But Yaśodā has a precious golden pearl, so she replaces Rādhārāṇī’s nose ring with this golden pearl. Then Mother Yaśodā dresses Śrī Rādhā in a beautiful blue sari. Its color actually matches perfectly Kṛṣṇa’s complexion. So, when she puts it on, it’s described, Rādhārāṇī blushes.

And meanwhile, meanwhile, one of Mother Yaśodā’s maidservants delivers a tray of ornaments. It’s described that they glitter like a thousand suns. Yaśodā selects a string of, of diamonds and hangs it around Śrī Rādhā’s neck. Then, moving behind Śrī Rādhā, Yaśodā takes Rādhārāṇī’s braid, which we mentioned earlier, in her hands and decorates it with various hairpins.

I was reading one hairpin made of gold, another is made of diamonds, one’s made of pearls, and others are made of jewels like rubies and emeralds and sapphires. And while this, uh, intimate exchange is taking place between Śrī Rādhā and Mother Yaśodā, all of Rādhārāṇī’s girlfriends are looking on in amazement.

Then Yaśodā says, "Oh, my precious little girl, your form and qualities soothe my heart. I dream of them always. What sins have I committed that I cannot have you as my daughter?

You and my son are like the two halves of my life or the pupils of my two eyes. My husband, the King of Rāṅga, also shares this sentiment, just as we share the sadness that you are not the wife of our dear Kṛṣṇa." Of course, Rādhārāṇī is Kṛṣṇa’s eternal consort, but for the sake of their pastimes as lovers, they they never went *parakīya* above.

So, after this, Mother Yaśodā gets Kṛṣṇa ready for taking his cows and friends into the forest. And part of that preparing him is she ties amulets and protective stones, you know, on Kṛṣṇa’s wrists and arms, too, so he’ll be protected in the forest.

And when she does that, Kṛṣṇa offers her, it’s described, prostrates with obeisances while laughing at his mother’s efforts to protect him from harm. And as Mother Yaśodā accompanies Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma down Nandagrāma hill, she pleads with Kṛṣṇa. It’s very sweet. "Oh, child, we have so much wealth.

Why then do you have to go to the forest herding cows?

Let others go. You can stay. I know none more dear than you. If misfortune were to befall you, I would perish. I shiver in fright to think of your body scorched by the sun’s harsh rays and your soft soles pricked by sharp stones." So, these words, little Kṛṣṇa, he holds his mother’s hands and he says, "It’s very nice, Māyā, but you need not fear.

In the presence of Balarāma, what harm can come to me?

Besides, Mother, there are no demons left in the forest. They’re all dead. Besides, there are no demons left in the forest. They’re all dead. The trees shelter us everywhere like big umbrellas, and the stones become like cotton balls under our feet.

Please, Mother, how could I neglect our tradition and my duty to care for the cows?

How could I neglect our tradition and my duty to care for cows?" Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So, while talking to his mother like this, one gopī reminds Mother Yaśodā, "O Queen, if you do not send Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī back to her home now, Śatila might become suspicious and forbid her from returning tomorrow to cook for Kṛṣṇa." So, Mother Yaśodā embraces Kṛṣṇa one last time and then gives him permission to depart, watching as he and Balarāma leave with a large herd of cows into the forest.

And after sending Kṛṣṇa off, Mother Yaśodā returns to her palace and with a sad heart consoles herself. How?

By seating Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī on her lap. She knows she has to send her home, but she loves Rādhārāṇī so much that she consoles herself from Kṛṣṇa’s departure by seating Rādhārāṇī on her lap. Actually, the ācāryas have said, I read this yesterday, Yaśodā’s love for Rādhā is just as intense as her love for Kṛṣṇa.

Very profound. Yaśodā’s love for Rādhā is just as intense as her love for Kṛṣṇa. So, then Yaśodā says to Śrī Rādhā, it melts your heart, "O Rādhā, consider me to be just like your mother, Kīrtidā, and this house just like your own home.

Alas, because of gossip, I cannot even keep you here for a full day. Unfortunately, the small-minded villagers are too harsh." So poetic, unfortunately, the small-minded villagers are too harsh, all the rumors. So, the ācāryas, they say, as Mother Yaśodā weeps, the palace walls melt in sympathy, and young gopīs weep alongside her.

Then Rādhā uses her own sari to wipe the tears from Yaśodā’s face and then falls into Mother Yaśodā’s loving embrace. Let me recite that again: "As Mother Yaśodā weeps, the palace walls melt in sympathy, and the young gopīs weep alongside her.

Then Śrī Rādhā uses her own sari to wipe the tears from Yaśodā’s face and then falls into Mother Yaśodā’s loving embrace." Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Such a wonderful morning pastime. The whole day, the whole night is filled with nectarian pastimes, and Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma.

So, today we’ll finish, as we often do, with, um, very choice verses from Śrīla Prabhupāda Sarasvatī Ṭhākura's Vṛndāvana Mahimāmṛta.

Always a perfect way to finish, to start, to say, in the middle, and to finish with. He writes, "I meditate on Vṛndāvana, resounding with the cuckoo’s fifth note and the playful sound of the flute, full of dancing peacocks and blossoming creepers and trees, replete with graceful shining bowers and colorful with flocks of birds and deer, endowed with various attractive rivers, ponds, and gof dunghills.

May my eyes, being overwhelmed, see the sweet waves of Vṛndāvana’s beauty.

May my intelligence drown in the ocean of Vṛndāvana’s great nectar.

May my body, filled with ecstatic bliss, roll on the ground of Vṛndāvana.

May I offer respects, falling down like a stick, to all the living beings in Śrī Vṛndāvana.

And may the supreme abode of Vṛndāvana, from which one can experience just by living here a sweet ocean of great rasa which cannot be attained as a conclusion even after deliberating on the words of the Upaniṣads, kindly manifest to me, Kṛṣṇa." So, we’ll leave you with those nectarian words of Śrīla Prabhupāda Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, and we’ll be back in a few days with some more nectar about our beloved Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma.

All glories to Śrī Guru and Gaurāṅga."