
"Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much. Please excuse me; I don't speak your very beautiful language, but I have a very expert translator. Yesterday, they also asked me to speak; this morning, when I checked my email, there were lots of emails from people who came to the festival asking me to reiterate exactly what I said yesterday. They liked the lecture, but they said their memory is not so good, so they wanted to hear it again.

So, for the last three hours, you've been watching the very beautiful ancient music, entertaining place, and nice food, but our actors are getting ready for the most amazing theater of the evening.

Yes.

They were spoken.

It contains 700 very concise verses of wisdom on how to live in this world and eventually go to the other world spiritually.

It's very interesting. In the beginning, Kṛṣṇa says that there are 8,400,000 species of life in the material world. I think our scientists have found 3,200,000, but Kṛṣṇa's point is that out of all these millions of species of life, the human form of life, which we have now, is the most important part.

And there is a specific reason that we have a special gift from God that the other animals do not.

What makes us different from all of them?

Even the most ignorant person is more intelligent than the smartest animal, and mankind has done amazing things with his or her intelligence in the last 200 years.

It's all very nice; it makes life a little easier. But according to the wisdom of the sacred texts of India and the yogīs, the ṛṣis, and the saints, that intelligence is meant for a higher purpose: to go within and discover that within this body there is a spiritual energy, and more specifically, there is an ātman—we say in Sanskrit—which means "self."

In fact, the first step in the science, you could say, of self-realization is to understand: "I am not the body, but I am the soul within the body."

Because the body is made of matter, and matter in any form is not conscious.

By definition, matter is lifeless. So, what is the body made of? Is it the same stuff? It's not conscious; it's not living.

But it can't move without a conscious driver.

Actually, earlier I was speaking with a doctor, and he said, "Yes, I can confirm that." He said, "In medical school, we learned that the body is 72 percent water."

But how much do we know about the soul, and how much do we know about the body?

You can come on the stage and speak for half an hour about your body, but if I say, "Speak for five minutes about the active, dynamic, illuminated soul," you'll be speechless. So we pride ourselves—in many ways, not always, but in many ways our society is very advanced—but my point is, unless you know who you actually are, you can't actually decide what is best for you in life.

It would be like the person who polishes the car but doesn't feed the driver. So this book can help us. These are universal truths that apply to all of mankind for all ages; it is a science of the soul. Of course, we find knowledge about spiritual things in every culture and every tradition, but this is like a PhD study in the sciences. For example, Kṛṣṇa describes in this ancient wisdom exactly where the soul is in the body. Not only "Who am I?" but "Where am I?" Where do you find the answer to this question? In Western culture, it is described that the soul is hovering in the region of the heart. Because sometimes we see a bird in the sky get caught in a pocket of air, and he is flapping, but he is not going anywhere.

So the soul is hovering here, and intuitively we know that because when we identify ourselves to someone, we point to our chest.

We don't point to our big toe. "I am talking to you"—no, we address the person just at the heart. So many details of spiritual wisdom: that particle of spirit soul enters the body at the moment of conception, but enlightened souls, they say that life is there from the moment of conception.

That the embryo grows because of the presence of the living soul. Dead things don't grow; lifeless things don't grow.

Like the car goes because of the driver, so as long as that soul is present in the embryo, it grows, then baby, and then there is birth.

But we don't want to talk about it because, well, we're scared, because we don't have knowledge. We don't want to be afraid because, actually, we have knowledge of exactly what happens when we die.

There is a beautiful Sanskrit verse in this connection.

From the body of the baby to a boy, to a youth, to an old man—in other words, as we are changing bodies, at the moment of death, we also change bodies.

Analogies help us understand complex philosophical statements. I was playing with trucks and my sister was playing with dolls; I can remember when I was 10. I had a different body, so I was playing soccer.

The doctor told me that in medical school he learned that every seven years all the cells in the body change—that's science. That means if you're 21, you've changed your body completely three times. Have you become three different people? Something is changing; something is remaining the same. The body is changing, but you are the same. And as we are changing bodies through life, we continue.

So reincarnation means change the body.

Scientists say we are chemicals and then the chemicals disperse and we die. Now, there is no hope in that philosophy. According to the Vedas—this is a revolutionary statement—according to the Vedas, the soul can be born into any of the 8,400,000 species of life. Dogs, cats, birds—they also have a soul equal to you and me, but they are temporarily wearing a different body.

You don't put petrol in a dog to make him bark.

Will we be born again as human beings? The doctor said, "Yeah, next life I want to be born in New York City. I want to be famous; I want to be rich; I want to have lots of girls." But I said, "No birth in this world is ideal."

It may be nice today, but it may rain tomorrow, so we will be in distress, and everyone has their story. All their lives are a mixture of happiness and distress. So I said this to the doctor. I said, "You know, even if you're born with a silver spoon in your mouth, you can't be perfectly happy." But happiness is what we're looking for, because the intrinsic nature of the soul is bliss.

The nature of water is that it's wet. So what is your intrinsic nature? Not your body, not your clothes, not your house—what is your inner, deepest desire? So I said to the doctor, "Look, what are you going to do?" He said, "I'm just going to be happy when it's good times and I'll tolerate the bad times."

Plan A is to go to that place where there is unlimited, eternal happiness. He said, "What's that? Hawaii? Thailand?"

In different times of the human race, special personalities—you could say divine personalities—they come to this world and they teach as much as the people of that time in history can understand.

Therefore, we should accept and embrace all the bona fide religions of the world. There is a spiritual one, and that first of all is that for our bodies, we have to take care of them, and our families, our country, the world—like climate change, environment. What is the highest duty? That while we have this rare human form of life, we take the opportunity to awaken that divine love for God, which is the highest happiness. And when we die, not take birth again, but that love will take us back home to the spiritual world. That's the goal of life. It's not just, you know, getting educated, having a career, getting married, having children, and growing old. That's important, but it's not the goal. The goal is to get out. When the house is on fire, the goal is to get out.

Is this world on fire? Besides the sunshine, the butterflies, vacation, Christmas? Yes, there is birth, disease, old age, and death, and no science and technology is ever going to stop them. Don't forget, we're spiritual beings in the material world. I know it's radical—"What's he saying? A stranger in a strange place."

You know, a good sailor who is famous as a good sailor is so because on the long voyage across the sea, he was polishing the brass, you know, on the ship and varnishing the wood on the deck.

Very beautiful, very focused on his duty.

My father said, "Don't become a sailor because you're always a little nervous on the water." No, he did his duty, but he was always thinking, "When am I going to reach the land?"

So why am I telling this sailor story?

And we shouldn't think it's easy; any time there's an urgency to get home. My years in this world are numbered, so I want to make sure that by the time I leave this body, I'm fully in love with God, which is the ticket.

Of course, the good people of Poland know this even better than me because you're a very pious nation; you have churches on every street corner. I'm just reminding you. And so you may be curious to know that in India, the way which they awaken that divine love for God is to sing God's names.

There's no difference between God and His name; He is present in His name and the sound of His name.

That way, you get accustomed to associating with Him, and by associating with a wonderful person for a long time, you fall in love.

So, some very simple truths that we all share this evening.

And we are meant to keep studying until the very end. We have published this 5,000-year-old text in your beautiful Polish language.

We also have very beautiful paintings, so you can get this book. I'm going to be sitting at the table by the yoga tent there, and if you'd like, you could purchase a copy, and as the guest speaker, I'd be very happy to sign the copy so you can remember this memorable event on your summer vacation on the Baltic—2022. Soon.

The opulence of the kingdom is a pious king; the opulence of the family is a beautiful, educated—

So, this is something you can read on the beach. Listen, you know the tan is going to go away—I'm sorry to say—when you're in the car by the time you get back to Warsaw or Kraków, the tan, it'll fade. This knowledge can guide you through this difficult journey of life to the eternal life of bliss and knowledge in the spiritual world with Kṛṣṇa. I'm here to sell you a book and, again, give it a dedication. That's enough philosophy, almost. I know you didn't come here expecting to hear a philosophical discourse, but it's also part of India's culture, a very important part of the tradition.""