"*00390*.*
"I am delighted, I am overjoyed, I am experiencing something of ecstasy being in the association of my dear Godbrother Vraja-śīkṣā Prabhu and Gurumā and all of the wonderful youth of ISV—took me a while to understand it means ISKCON Silicon Valley—and I am feeling very blessed to be in your association, especially here. We are all experiencing so much emotion at this very sacred place because it was here, as we read on the plaque over there, this is where our beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda appeared on September 1st, 1896. Under this very tree, his mother gave birth, and today there are just a few of us sitting here acknowledging the significance of this place. But know for sure that one day in the future, this place will attract the attention of the whole world. Just as Caitanya Mahāprabhu spread the glories of Lord Kṛṣṇa around the world, so Śrīla Prabhupāda spread the glories of Lord Caitanya all over the world, and our duty in this previous time in history is to spread the glories of Prabhupāda.

Everywhere it will attract the attention. It is going to be a little bit small when the world knows about it, if only because Śrīla Prabhupāda said to my Godbrother, Guru Dāsa, that one day scholars will write how this movement saved the world in its darkest hour. He said that; I often quote that one day this movement will save the world in its darkest hour. And it kind of feels like that darkest hour is coming, I don't know. So, this is the place that Prabhupāda took birth, but we would rather say this is where he appeared. Just like when we speak about Kṛṣṇa’s *janma*, we don't like to use the word "birth" because "birth" means someone is taking birth because of his past *karma*, it is his destiny. But the Lord doesn't take birth; He appears of His own sweet accord. So, similarly, I don't like to use the word "birth" because Prabhupāda’s appearance is divine. His appearance is divine.

One of my senior Godbrothers, who was Prabhupāda’s secretary, one time he was traveling with Śrīla Prabhupāda and they were traveling from Nairobi, Kenya, to Bombay—at the time, present-day Mumbai. And in those days, there was a lot of yellow fever in Africa, so before Prabhupāda actually left India, he took a yellow fever vaccination—that is something a lot of devotees don't know about, anyway. And because he knew he would be traveling in different parts of the world before he got on the *Jaladūta*, he had a yellow fever vaccination on his arm. He carried that certificate with him everywhere. But when he was many years later in Nairobi, his secretary—who I won't mention his name—lost it. So when Prabhupāda arrived into Bombay on that trip, the immigration, they asked, "So, you've come from Africa, are you bringing yellow fever?" Prabhupāda said, "No, I have her certificate." So they asked, he said, "So, where is my..." He asked the secretary, "Oh, I forgot it." So they put Prabhupāda into what is called quarantine in the Bombay airport; they had a place, you had to stay there 14 days just to see if yellow fever didn't manifest. Prabhupāda just accepted it, and he was staying in this—it wasn't a very nice facility. So one day the secretary came and he apologized, "Prabhupāda, I am so sorry that I forgot the yellow fever vaccination." Prabhupāda said, "Yes, you are rascal, you are nonsense, I never wanted to come to this nasty place." And then the servant—he told me, he just felt like a germ or something—"I never wanted to come to this nasty place." And then the servant again apologized, and Prabhupāda said, "No, no, not this. This world, *duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam*, this is a terrible place, a temporary place full of so many miseries. I did not want to come." Then the servant said, "Wow, Prabhupāda is talking about the whole material creation." It's too loud. So then Prabhupāda said, "Yes, but I came because Kṛṣṇa asked me to come. Kṛṣṇa asked me to come."

Giri-rāja Mahārāja said one time, my dear Godbrother, that there are two types of personalities, *jīvas*, who come to this material creation to preach. One is who comes of his own accord—it appears that in Vaikuṇṭha, they are aware of what we are undergoing here. So one type of soul who comes from the spiritual world decides to come himself. And then Giri-rāja Mahārāja said the other type is the one who is asked by Kṛṣṇa to come, just like when you have an important mission, you choose your most qualified man: "You carry on this mission." That is Śrīla Prabhupāda. But Prabhupāda said to Kṛṣṇa, "But I am not very inclined towards austerity." And then Kṛṣṇa said—Prabhupāda is recounting this to his secretary—Prabhupāda said, "I am not very inclined towards austerity, but then Kṛṣṇa told me," Prabhupāda said, "'It does not matter, you go down to the Earth planet and you preach the science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and I will take care of everything else.'" So it was, "You go down to the material world, you preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and I will arrange everything for you." So that happened. So it wasn't that Prabhupāda’s birth was like the birth of some ordinary conditioned soul, or even a great conditioned soul; it was because he was ordered by the Lord to come. And because of his appearance under this jackfruit tree right here, his mother, Rajani, gave birth.

Okay, and my point this morning is—I don't want to take too much time—my point is that actually, his appearance was predicted. Prabhupāda’s appearance was predicted. Just as the Lord’s appearance is predicted, the Lord’s representative of the caliber of Śrīla Prabhupāda can also be seen, can also be predicted. Thousands of years ago, this International Society for—and I am going to be quite straightforward—this International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness was predicted namely by one of the Ālvārs. The Ālvārs were, what, 4,000 years ago, something like that? How many, nine? 5,000? No, Ālvārs, they are the original bhakti-yogīs, we would say in modern terms, appeared in India. One of those Ālvārs was named Nammālvār, and his book *Tiruvāymoḻi* 5.2.1, I found a quote; he shared a vision he had. This is amazing, listen to his vision, his prediction of the International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness. He wrote: "Victory, victory! I behold something wonderful! All the inauspiciousness of the living entities is being destroyed. No one is going to hell; Yamarāja has no more work to do, and the effects of Kali-yuga have ceased to exist. This is because all over this world, an increasing number of Lord Viṣṇu’s devotees are singing His names and dancing while playing musical instruments." Who’s doing that? The International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness.

Then in *Caitanya-maṅgala*, in the section called *Sūtra-khaṇḍa* by Vṛndāvana dāsa Ṭhākura, we hear the Yuga-avatāra Mahāprabhu state that He will send His leading preacher abroad—abroad means from Bhārata, from India—He’ll send His leading preacher from India to spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness around the world. It’s just following that prediction. And there is a clear reference to Śrīla Prabhupāda in those writings of Ṭhākura. We hear Lord Caitanya speaking of His descent: "Chanting of the name and qualities of Kṛṣṇa is the life and energy of Vaiṣṇavas. I will reveal these activities and rejuvenate pure devotional service unto Myself. While He is on the earth, in this way, I will destroy all the sins of Kali-yuga. So, all of you, My associates, go ahead and take birth on the earthly planet before My advent and don't remain behind." We know if we study the lives of the, like, the Six Gosvāmīs, they are male personalities, but they all have their eternal spiritual identity as *mañjarīs*, and He’s speaking to the gopas also: "All of you, let’s go to the Earth planet, have *harināma-saṅkīrtana*." And He continues: "Taking the sharp sword of the congregational chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, *nāma-saṅkīrtana*, I will root out and destroy the demoniac mentality in the hearts of the conditioned souls. If some sinful people escape and, giving up religious principles, go to far-off countries, then My *senāpati-bhakta*—*senāpati* is a term, it means like a military field commander, we would say in our terms, a general—My *senāpati-bhakta* will come at that time and give them Kṛṣṇa consciousness." So who has done that? Śrīla Prabhupāda, single-handedly. Generally, a general has his army; there was no one, Prabhupāda came alone. Later, we’re going to go to the docks where Prabhupāda left, just his son was there saying goodbye. I sometimes envision 33 million of my Godbrothers and Godsisters sending Prabhupāda off to the West. So that we see, as history goes on, that original vision of Nammālvār, it is coming to pass.

Because then, in 1885, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura confirmed that this paramount prediction of Nammālvār was going to happen. In his *Sajjana-toṣaṇī* 4.3, he writes—listen to this, this is Bhaktivinoda: "Very soon, the unparalleled path of Śrī Harināma-saṅkīrtana will be propagated all over the world." It wasn't even being propagated in Bengal; it had been lost to the annals of time, but he’s jumping ahead. *Tri-kāla-jñas*, these pure devotees, they can see past, present, and future. So Bhaktivinoda: "Very soon, the unparalleled path of *nāma-saṅkīrtana* will be propagated all over the world. Oh, for that day when the fortunate French, Russian, German, and American people will take up banners, *mṛdaṅgas*, and *karatālas* and raise kīrtana through their streets and towns! When will that day come?"

And I remember historically, it was 1973 I think, I think it was the first, or maybe '74, it was the first big Māyāpur festival. Prabhupāda ordered it, the devotees came from all over the world. We all came, many *saṅkīrtana* devotees, and Cit-sukha-ānanda Swami at the time, he read—we were going to go on *harināma*—so then he read this to us, spoke it, and we went down Bhakti-siddhānta Road. It was just a dusty path at that time from the Advaita Ācārya temple down to the Yoga-pīṭha. And we went out, and suddenly from out of the Yoga-pīṭha came this big kīrtana party of Bengalis who obviously knew of these predictions. And I remember, I think it was—I saw it as a historic moment. They saw us, and we saw them, and because this statement by Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura was in our minds, was actually in our hearts as *saṅkīrtana* devotees, we ran towards each other. You know, sometimes you see devotees running with kīrtana on the *harināma*, you know, we were like 400 devotees, they were like 200, and these two *saṅkīrtana* parties, Bengali and foreigners, we rushed, we ran, we ran, and—boom! And I remember devotees were falling off because the road is kind of like that, you know, like a gully there; they were rolling off with, you know, embracing the Bengali devotees and this and that. Kīrtana! I’ll never forget that kīrtana. That was something amazing, it went on and on in the boiling sun, you know, went on and on. "Very soon, the unparalleled path of *nāma-saṅkīrtana* will be propagated all over the world. Oh, for that day when the fortunate English, French, Russian, German, and American people take up banners, *mṛdaṅgas*, and *karatālas* and raise kīrtana through their streets and towns." And I was in the middle of the kīrtana, shouting under—I was thinking, "It’s happening! It’s happening!" And I got—I got very emotional. It’s happening! I’m a witness.

And soon after—because that was, he made that prediction in 1885—soon after, Prabhupāda was born, he appeared. And we take that as no coincidence; we take that, that’s not a coincidence. In a room conversation with the Canadian ambassador to Iran on March 13th, 1975, listen to what Prabhupāda said with humility: "Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura was the first origin of this movement." It’s a very poetic way of saying he’s the pioneer. "He was the first origin of this movement, but he simply thought of it and he was expecting that some others would be willing to take up this work. Well, somebody says that I am that same man. Somebody says that I am that man because I was born in 1896, 12 months after the prediction." In 1896, let us remember, that was the year that Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura sent his book, *Lord Caitanya’s Life and Teachings*, to the Western world, and Prabhupāda was born in that same year. He sometimes mentioned that this book was written and sent; he said, "I was born the same year." So, Bhaktivinoda... because we are all—especially all of you, under Vraja-śīkṣā’s direction—you are all hearts and kīrtana devotees, you are the heartbeat of this movement. You are carrying on the desire of all the ācāryas of the centuries who prepared for this prediction to actually become manifest. And I believe from afar, watching and blessing us, let it be known that because in that year Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura wrote that book and sent it to libraries around the world, he is the first book distributor in our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya to sell books in the Western world! Let’s give him a big round of applause!

So, our Śrīla Prabhupāda was the person expected and entrusted as the *senāpati*, the commander-in-chief of Lord Caitanya’s army. No one can contest that, as per the instruction he received from Kṛṣṇa in the spiritual world. Actually, I believe he knew he was destined for the *saṅkīrtana* after he took birth. That we can also verify by the subway conductor, Mr. Rubin. I found out who it was—we have heard about the guy who sat on the bench, and Prabhupāda was on the bench, and they had a conversation in 1965 when Prabhupāda arrived. His name was Mr. Rubin, and he was a subway conductor taking his lunch break; he sat on the bench next to Prabhupāda in 1965. And he recounted—it gives us an idea how Prabhupāda knew who he was. Although he never stated like that, but he knew, he understood. Mr. Rubin recounted, "Śrīla Prabhupāda seemed to know that he would have temples filled with devotees." He was alone! Prabhupāda didn't even have a sweater for the winter cold. He would look out on the bench and say, "I am not a poor man, I am rich. There are temples and books, they are existing, they are there. But only time is separating us from them." So Prabhupāda knew. And the fulfillment of these prophecies from the Nammālvār and from himself, they were also confirmed in recent times. We’re going back thousands of years, hundreds of years, and now in recent times, Prabhupāda’s service was predicted. These prophecies were all confirmed by who? By many of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s Godbrothers. We hear there was some difficulty in the Gauḍīya Maṭha and sometimes some were not appreciative, but there were many Godbrothers who were appreciative.

An introduction speech I found by Dr. OBL Kapoor in Vṛndāvana. He spoke at a function, October 15th, 1972. It’s two paragraphs, but let me state it here at this historic place. Dr. Kapoor, he said to the distinguished people of Vṛndāvana—it was a big meeting—"The return back to our homeland, Vṛndāvana, by Śrīla Prabhupāda is particularly significant because this time he comes back with a host of his Western disciples, who we only heard about. This is really a rare moment in history, isn't it? For the first time in the history of the world, for the first time at least in living memory, Vṛndāvana—the message of Vaiṣṇavism, the message of Mahāprabhu, the message of devotion and pure devotion—has been carried to the West, carried there so successfully by Śrīla Prabhupāda. I am sure that historians in the future will have a lot to say about Prabhupāda and his movement, and they will even be envious of us for living in a time when this movement was begun and for participating in it." People will be jealous. "Oh, these youth at ISV, they grew up at a time when they were being directed into the *saṅkīrtana* movement by Vraja-śīkṣā Prabhu and his Godbrothers and Godsisters who spread this movement. They will be jealous of you: 'Oh, I wish I was born at that time,' just like some devotees, 'I wish I was here when Prabhupāda was here.'" So in the future, they’ll also be jealous that the *saṅkīrtana* really started exploding in the last decades, they call the "Hare Kṛṣṇa explosion."

Another Godbrother, B.B. Puri Mahārāja, he was speaking one time about Prabhupāda, recorded. I listened to it. He said, "And what about the qualities he had, Prabhupāda, all devotional qualities he possessed? And that we can know him, that he is great, just by seeing his preaching. Less than 10 years, there is no history, no recording anywhere of such a feat. Preaching in 10 years, he has established the Divine Name everywhere, as was told by Mahāprabhu’s future prediction, which I quoted." And Prabhupāda himself hinted, in a very humble way, at his extraordinary service on a morning walk in Nellore—it’s a big city in India—January 4th, 1976. A devotee said, "Prabhupāda, they say that if Caitanya Mahāprabhu wanted Kṛṣṇa consciousness in Western countries, why didn't He go there Himself?" They’re walking on the beach; Prabhupāda stops, he puts his cane in the sand, lifts his head up like some great personality, Prabhupāda replied: "He left the credit for me." And then he laughed. "He left the credit for me." In other words, he wanted me to do it. Many are called, but few are chosen. And what credit we must give him for fulfilling the simple instruction of a spiritual master! But it was pregnant with so much history and meaning and significance. We’re going to go there later; Prabhupāda came to see his Guru Mahārāja for the first time, that building’s been renovated. The very moment Prabhupāda walked in—there’s no time to lose. All these ācāryas have a sense of urgency because Kali-yuga is advancing very quickly. We have to catch up and override Kali-yuga, fulfill the prediction, simple instruction. Before I heard, even before Prabhupāda got up from his obeisances, "You look like a nice, educated young man, why don't you preach the message of Caitanya Mahāprabhu in the English-speaking language?" And later on at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, "If you ever get money, distribute books."

So in conclusion, we can see that Prabhupāda was the emissary who Kṛṣṇa personally chose. His appearance in this world was not a birth, it was an appearance. It was predicted. His movement, Nammālvār, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, the pioneer of this movement, revitalized—he foresaw this commander-in-chief appearing. But Prabhupāda, from the simple instructions of Bhakti-siddhānta Sarasvatī, he went above and beyond the call of duty. This is a term we heard in the military: "Every soldier wants to go above and beyond the call of duty." How did Prabhupāda go above and beyond the call of duty? He had his books, not only in English, but he ordered them—and to some degree during his lifetime—had them translated into all the major languages of the world. That supersedes the instruction of Bhakti-siddhānta Sarasvatī! He did more than the English language: French, German, Russian, Spanish, and recently in South Africa, we are printing books of Prabhupāda in the Zulu language. Zulu! I met the leader of the Zulu people, Chief Goodwill, powerful man, I think 35, 40 million Zulus in South Africa in KwaZulu-Natal. I had the opportunity to meet him, we had a discussion. He said, "Mahārāja, Mahārāja"—he was a good Kṛṣṇa man—"Mahārāja, what do you call God in your language and your scripture? What do you call God?" I said, "Well, God has many names according to His attributes, His pastimes, His qualities, but the principal name of God according to Jīva Gosvāmī, the original name of God, is Kṛṣṇa." He said, "Oh, very nice, Kṛṣṇa." I said, "What do you call God in the Zulu language?" He went, "Ah, we call it Akula. You can say Mahārāja, Akula." I said, "What does it mean?" I said, "It means..." he said, "It means that person who has the most cows!" Say, right, another name for Kṛṣṇa is Govinda! He said, "Oh, I like this Kṛṣṇa." And then just a little while later, he passed on, he left this world.

Go back to where I was here. I have some more quotes for you. So we are blessed to be as modern-day representatives. That’s a blessing, that’s a blessing. He got another instruction: "If you ever get money, print books." So Prabhupāda—one of the books distributed—so you’re doing the books, you think that Prabhupāda’s not aware of that? Of course he’s aware of that, and he’s blessing all of you to do it. Because these things cannot be done unless one gets the *kṛpā-śakti*, the internal energy, internal potency of Lord Caitanya. And that’s why you can’t stop doing *saṅkīrtana*. *Saṅkīrtana* is not easy. People came to this world to forget God, they’re forgetful of God, some of them are reviving it gradually. But people come to this world to forget God, and you’re going out reminding them or telling them to remember God. It goes against—it’s like, what do they say in—"against the grain," when you’re doing carpentry work. But why do you keep doing it? Because you’re getting that empowerment from the Lord. You feel that energy and you enjoy sharing this message of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So *senāpati*, we could say. But what about the other personalities? They can also be seen as *senāpatis*. Each one of our ācāryas in his own way has made it possible for us to go out and distribute books. Each gave his contribution to the centuries. Each ācārya—why? Well, even his own spiritual master, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, was pleased to acknowledge the service of our Prabhupāda and give credit to his beloved disciple. In a room conversation in Vṛndāvana, June 17th, 1977, he said—and Prabhupāda is quoting him, excuse me. In a room conversation in Vṛndāvana, June 17th, 1977, Prabhupāda wrote how his spiritual master acknowledged his service in a humble way, because we always give credit to our spiritual masters. Prabhupāda said, "And in my horoscope, there was written there, 'After 70th year, this man will go outside India and establish so many temples.' I could not understand, 'What is this that I have to go outside India? It's not possible.' But my Guru Mahārāja foretold. He told my Godbrothers, especially Śrīdhara Mahārāja and others, 'This Abhay, he’ll do the needful when the time comes. Nobody requires to help him, he will do it all alone.' Prabhupāda said, 'He told that in 1935, and after all, this has come true.' Guru Mahārāja told, and in the beginning, first sight, he told, 'You have to do this.'" So this is Śrīla Prabhupāda.

We could go on for hours. I think I’ve stolen some time here. But to be the servant of a glorious master is one’s highest achievement, and it comes with a significant responsibility. In the future, you’re the ones who are going to carry on, you’re the next generation. Maybe—I don’t know, we talk about the second generation of devotees, I think you’re the third or fourth now—but this responsibility will be given to you. It’s like that race where there’s four people racing representing their team, they go, each one goes around one time the track, and the baton is given. So we are giving you the baton in this lifetime by inspiring you, by bringing you to these places of huge historic significance. The place where Prabhupāda appeared under this jackfruit tree—please be encouraged, please be inspired, please take up the baton in future years, you continue this as the honored representatives of Śrīla Prabhupāda.

For me, this is one of the most important places in creation. Like for me, the most important place in this creation, the most holy place, the most significant place. And there are many—there are 16 billion holy places in Vraja, and there’s Māyāpur, and there’s all the temples in South India. But for me, the most significant place is Prabhupāda’s samādhi at our Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandir, Vṛndāvana. Because without his grace, I wouldn't be here, you wouldn't be here, this *saṅkīrtana* wouldn't be here, the glories of Kṛṣṇa—no one would know. So each year when I come back home, back to Vṛndāvana, my first stop is Prabhupāda’s samādhi, and I give a report. I know Prabhupāda’s hearing. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura was asked one time, "Do the ancient sages of yore, when we pray to them, do they hear us?" And I read that—I thought, "I can't wait for the answer," so I covered the page. I just like, "Can they hear us?" And Bhaktivinoda replied, "Yes, the sages of yore can not only hear you, but they reciprocate with you." So, for me, it’s the most important day of the year. I go and I say, "Prabhupāda, I’ve done this, and I’m waiting for your next instruction." And actually, we consider—we all want to go back to the spiritual world because that’s Prabhupāda—I wanted us to come back to the spiritual world. But I always think that how can we go to the spiritual world and ask for service, and we haven't yet completed the service of our Guru Mahārāja in this world? So let us all work together, your generation, your children, your grandchildren, let’s all work as one team and fulfill all the desires of Śrīla Prabhupāda: books in everyone’s house, sets of books in everyone’s house. That’s your Prabhupāda-dāsa-s, Silicon Valley, that whole area, gurukulas all over the world, farms all over the world, cows protected all the world, people stopping abortion. We have a lot of work to do! So, "Jaya, you will be my master, birth after birth." Let us think like that. And when all is done and accomplished, we can come before him and say, "Śrīla Prabhupāda, your mission is accomplished in this world. What would you like me to do next? Come to this next universe?" Okay.

My Godbrother, Aindra Dāsa, he was a *bhakta* in new Māyāpur, Prabhupāda was giving *darśana*, and he was a new *bhakta*. He raised his hand when Prabhupāda asked for questions, and he said, "Prabhupāda, where are you going to go when you die, Swāmī?" We all looked—I said, "That’s not an appropriate question, bhakta." But whatever Prabhupāda said: "Oh, I plan to go to the lower planetary systems, to Pātālaloka, to continue preaching the message of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu on the order of my Guru Mahārāja." And I thought, "Prabhupāda, I’m going to—I want to follow you. Because wherever you are, that’s Vaikuṇṭha, that’s Goloka Vṛndāvana." So take this trip here to India very seriously, but we’re not—you know—we’re not ordinary tourists. We’ve come here to be inspired under the direction of your spiritual masters to be the next generation to carry the baton, spreading this wonder movement. You are all blessed to be part of the prediction. Thank you very much, Hare Kṛṣṇa.""